  Data scientists and analysts routinely spend almost 3/4th of their time trying to search, collate, clean, cross-validate and prepare data from multiple legacy systems and incompatible ETL pipelines in order to prepare data for analysis, simulation and visualization. One key strategy for alleviating this BBoM approach is to create a unified mechanism to transport data across multiple clouds, edge locations in the field and corporate datacenters in a secure, reliable, efficient and scalable fashion. Another critical method is to ensure that all data flows through this platform is comprehensively annotated and the metadata is exposed to business users for accessible data discovery, analysis and reporting. My role in this company-wide initiative is classified into two broad themes, one as an Enterprise Platform Architect responsible for designing, engineering, evangelizing and supporting multiple enterprise data platforms (based on Kafka, Zookeeper, Elasticsearch, Hadoop and Kubernetes) and the second as a polyglot developer and data scientist with a stream first, event driven approach to solving diverse business problems leveraging data. 

Roles and Responsibilities
Enterprise Datahub Platform Architect
Responsible for the design, architecture, testing and implementation of a 10 node 32 TB Kafka cluster as a secure, durable, scalable stream data platform. The clusters are present in AWS, Google Cloud and the corporate datacenter and topics are replicated between them when necessary.
Collaborated with the enterprise network architecture and SecOps teams to determine bandwidth, network size and IP allocation (no overlapping CIDR blocks) requirements for enabling a VPN connection between AWS and the corporate datacenter.
Worked with the network engineering teams to set up, configure and test a VPN connection and add the required exceptions to the corporate firewall to enable bi-directional network connectivity for the required IPs and protocols/ports related to the EDH Platform.
Designed and implemented the AWS Virtual Private Cloud(VPC) with public and private subnets with NAT gateways deployed in subnets for egress internet traffic.
Extensively used Terraform for infrastructure orchestration and Ansible for configuration management to have versioned, reproducible, scalable, secure and maintainable Infrastructure as code(IaC).
Leveraged advanced features of Ansible including templates, handlers, Vault lookup plugin, registered variables and conditionals for writing playbooks.
Setup Launch configurations and Auto Scaling groups in AWS for easy expansion/contraction of the cluster.
Setup and configured Vault clients with multiple authentication mechanisms (GitHub, UserPass, Ping) to securely store, retrieve and share secrets like SSH private keys, SSL passwords and API access tokens.
Setup and configured a temporary Ubuntu VM to run Dockerized Kafka Connect and configured Linux users for multiple teams. It runs ~60 connectors with 16GB RAM, 60GB disk and 2 CPUs. This is replaced by the Enterprise Kubernetes cluster.
Performed a PoC to determine the viability of running Kafka in Kubernetes on AWS.
Set up and configured a 5 node GKE cluster to run monitoring and administration apps including Prometheus, Grafana, Alertmanager and Kafka Manager(CMAK)in Kubernetes.
Used the kubectl CLI tool as well as the Kubernetes GUI to create, update and monitor various deployments and services.
Setup VPN and VPC Peering connections in Google Cloud to move data seamlessly from on-premises Kafka to AWS Kafka to GCP Kafka.
Wrote and deployed AWS Lambda Python functions to dynamically update hostname in AWS Route53 upon IP change due to re-creation of instances.
Architected, configured and deployed the Confluent Schema Registry for storing Avro schema metadata in a highly available cross datacenter fashion. All the schemas are stored in the AWS Kafka cluster in a highly partitioned, compacted topic. The schema-registry slave instances in the other datacenters act as proxy and cache for the schemas being requested.
Helped customers register their schemas by clarifying Avro data types and their mappings to the source data store (Oracle, Teradata, Netezza, Postgres, CSV etc.) using the REST API.
Configured and deployed a HA set of Kafka REST Proxy servers to enable producing and consuming messages over HTTP.
Conducted a PoC to enhance the security of the EDH platform by using TLS v1.2 for inflight encryption of all inter-broker communication and broker-client communication. All communication on EDH today happens over TLS.
Conducted Security Architecture Reviews with the SecOps team to determine overall security levels and features of the Datahub Platform and helped receive final approval for going live.
Implemented SSL/TLS as an authentication mechanism for Kafka. The CN and OU identify the team and organization within the company.
Designed and implemented a mechanism for topic level authorization for Kafka clients using Kafka ACLs (stored in Zookeeper). All PII data is required to be stored in topics with read and write ACLs.
Worked with customers to identify the classification level (as determined by the company’s Data Classification Standard) for their data in order to determine if ACLs are needed for their topic.
Used Docker in clustered mode to setup Kafka and the Confluent Platform for pre-production environments.
Created Docker images to run Kafka Connect in Cloudfoundry.
Deployed and managed a variety of apps including Java, HTML docs and Go apps in CF using Buildpacks.
Collaborated with the Kafka SMEs from Confluent Inc. to identify, isolate and remedy code errors and performance improvements in Kafka and the Confluent Platform. Prepared root cause analysis reports for such occurrences.
Performed Platform upgrades with zero downtime (from CP2.0.1 to CP5.0.1 all versions).
Wrote scripts to download Confluent Platform artifacts locally and upload them to servers in the corporate datacenter due to corporate web filtering.
Implemented a lean procedure to onboard secure clients by having client TLS certificates attached to GitHub issues and adding them to the broker truststores. Further automated it and made it self-service in the Datahub Portal (more in the Developer section).  
Implemented a comprehensive monitoring/alerting solution for the Datahub Platform using Elasticsearch, Beats and Kibana for Logs and Prometheus/Grafana for metrics.
Leveraged X-Pack to enable SSL based node and client communication for Elasticsearch as well as log-based alerting to Slack.  
Integrated GitHub issues with Slack using webhooks to get actionable notifications when new issues are created/updated.
Implemented a lean process to peer VPCs from different accounts in AWS to enable client access to EDH.
Participated in Security Design Committees to implement a comprehensive security architecture(Authn/authz/audit) for a variety of data platforms in the organization.
Tuned various CPU, network, log cleaner, replica fetcher and i/o parameters in Kafka to increase multiple CPU utilization, reduce controlled and unclean restart times and improve general performance with > 2000 partitions per broker.
Exposed JMX metrics for all Platform services via HTTP using the Prometheus JMX Exporter including active controller, number of messages and bytes in/out per sec, replica fetcher latency, ZK node count and thread count among many other metrics.
Exposed System (OS Level) metrics on all platform servers like CPU, memory, disk utilization, I/O threads, network throughput and latency among many other metrics.
Configured Prometheus as a persistent easily accessible datastore for all the above metrics (three months’ worth of data).
Implemented queries on the Prometheus HTTP API compute real-time 5 min averages for cluster messages/bytes per second and exposed it on the homepage of the Datahub Portal.
Implemented queries on the Prometheus HTTP API compute real-time 1 min averages for per topic messages and bytes per second and exposed them on the topic detail page of the Datahub Portal.
Configured users and organizations to allow for secure access to Grafana dashboards for customers of the Datahub Platform.
Designed, architected and implemented a comprehensive system for topic naming to reflect data category, organization, data description and data format. These conventions are used to provide admin access to users in the Portal using topic prefixes.
Tuned Elasticsearch clusters to reduce memory and CPU footprint, split indices based on log source and applied a shorter retention policy. Reduced AWS expenses by 37% per month due to instance downsizing.
Planned developed and managed a process for seamlessly migrating Zookeeper ensembles from one Datacenter to another with zero impact to dependent applications and platforms.
Collaborated with Data Asset teams to design, setup and implement a variety of relational databases including PostgreSQL, Aurora and MySQL using AWS RDS.
Conducted PoCs to test validate pipelines moving data from Oracle Exadata on-premises to PostgreSQL and MySQL in the cloud (AWS and GCP) through Kafka topics. More than 100m records per day move through this process now.
Involved in replacing RHEL with Ubuntu for better package management and more streamlined upgrade process. Reduced expenses by 30% by avoiding RHEL licensing fee in AWS.
Deployed multiple independent instances of KSQL in Kubernetes to execute SQL queries on Kafka topics and setup advanced stream processing and active decisioning workflows.
Worked with the Unix and VMWare teams to add CPUs and disk to the corporate datacenter VMs to satisfy the rapid growth and customer adoption of the Datahub Platform.
Responsible for a comprehensive PoC, build, test and deploy of the Kafka Connect framework for elegant data transport from various databases (Oracle Exadata, Teradata, MySQL and Microsoft SQL Server) to Kafka topics with fully automatic schema inference and data conversion.
Setup configured and tuned a 5 node Kafka Connect cluster with Avro Converters and leveraging the schema registry to durably store all newly generated schemas from source databases.
Setup and configured Portainer for easy management of Docker containers.
Created a process for users of the platform to contribute their sample Kafka clients with SSL in a variety of languages including Python, C#, Golang and Scala the documentation site in GitHub Enterprise for the benefit of future customers.
Setup process to store all database driver artifacts in AWS S3 and update the Kafka Connect CLASSPATH when new connectors are released on GitHub.
Helped customers debug deployment and performance issues with their Kafka clients (producers/consumers) in Cloudfoundry. Scaling up consumer instances, tuning memory and resolving network connectivity issues.
Setup and configured build and CI/CD pipelines in Jenkins with build on commit from GitHub repositories and deploy artifacts to Nexus and AWS S3.
Contributed to comprehensive customer documentation including onboarding, security, design patterns and known issues/troubleshooting strategies for the Datahub Platform using Mkdocs and Markdown.
Created an automated process to deploy the docs using the ReadtheDocs theme in Cloudfoundry.
Setup VMs for users to run Docker containers for ad-hoc Kafka Connect jobs.
Created and configured Docker images to run Kafka Connect Standalone with a variety of connectors including JDBC Source/Sink (Oracle, Exadata, Teradata, PostgreSQL), S3 and Elasticsearch.
Performed a PoC to determine the feasibility of integrating the Istio service mesh with Kafka and the Datahub Platform using Kubernetes to provide a one-stop service orchestration platform for unbounded streams of data.
Configured a 5 node highly available Kubernetes cluster with 2 master nodes and three worker nodes using kubeadm with an external etcd cluster.
Tuned the etcd cluster for low latency reads and writes. Setup Slack alerts and metrics using Prometheus/Alertmanager and Grafana.
Setup and configured DNS, proxy and dashboards for the enterprise Kubernetes cluster.
Conducted seminars and working sessions to onboard new users, evangelize the Datahub Platform, solicit feedback and enable all Monsanto customers to use the platform productively.
Installed and configured a full-fledged package manager for the enterprise Kubernetes cluster. (https://helm.sh
Conducted a PoC to setup and run a blockchain platform with compacted Kafka topics as the storage backend.
Designed, architected and productionized a simple, efficient process based on Docker to prepare, test, validate and deploy KSQL queries and KSQL batch scripts in Kubernetes to create and manipulate streams and in order to enable a variety of stream processing workflows(More in Developer section).
Configured and tuned parameters for KSQL instances including timeouts, metadata topic partitions/replicas and intermediate stream topic partitions/replicas as well as the underlying producer/consumer properties. 
Helped setup Kubernetes pods to process change-data-capture streams from SAP using Informatica Data Replicator to separate data belonging to different tables into different topics. ~250 pods run on the cluster processing as many tables from the CDC stream. 
Expanded the Kubernetes cluster from five workers to seven to accommodate higher load.  
Wrote functional and integration tests for a number of Terraform resources and modules using Golang/Terratest to ensure error-free repeatable infrastructure deployment. 

        2. Polyglot Developer/Data Wrangler/Data Scientist
Responsible for general design, the architecture of the data pipelines leveraging the Apache Kafka and Confluent Platform based Enterprise Datahub.
Designed and architected a comprehensive Datahub Portal as a self-service tool to manage resources in Datahub such as creating/updating/deleting topics, Kafka SSL certs, ACLs, User metadata, Kafka Connect connectors and detailed per topic and general platform metrics.
Collaborated and advised Datahub users on the appropriate client configurations (acks/max message size/consumer poll times etc.) and data formats(JSON/Avro/text/binary).
Implemented sample Java and Golang producers and consumers to enable new Kafka developers to gain an insight into the intricacies of setting up Kafka clients.
Used the Play! Framework extensively to build a powerful scalable web app using controllers to route REST API calls to Scala methods and services to act on the requests.
Wrote a simple Bash script for a one-line Golang install on all major development platforms (Linux 32/64, Darwin and Raspberry Pi)
Setup and configured an HTTPS public endpoint in AWS to receive data from field sensors using Apache NiFi and persist them to Kafka topics based on data source and type. This system ingests more than 10 million messages a day from ~90 field-based weather and soil sensors.
Implemented a Java app using the Kafka Streams APIs to aggregate spatial temperature readings to compute temperature maps for farm plots.
Implemented a Golang app to poll Prometheus for metrics and write those events to Kafka.
Wrote a simple R client for Kafka to consume price data and compute daily summary statistics for those DataFrames.
Worked with a variety of Datahub platform customers to onboard their code/app, help debug connectivity and configuration issues, fix bugs in the code, optimize for performance and reliability, popularize new features(rebalance listeners, idempotent/transactional clients etc.).
Helped create a process to migrate platform users from insecure plaintext clients to SSL based authenticated clients with ACLs for authorization. Debugged issues with TLS certificates and keys. 
Worked with a variety of Datahub platform customers to leverage existing topics in Kafka  for topic reuse. Helped discover and annotate schemas/data-dictionaries to enable understanding/adoption of existing data streams.  
Designed comprehensive pipelines to migrate large amounts of data from data warehouses and data marts like Teradata, MS SQL Server and Oracle Exadata to fully managed databases like PostgresQL RDS and Aurora DB in the AWS cloud using Kafka and Kafka Connect.
Prepared sample producers and consumers in a variety of languages and published them in the platform documentation including Java/Scala/Python/JavaScript/Golang/R. 
Leveraged the Kafka Connect framework for a variety of batch and incremental data loads from Oracle, Teradata, SQL Server etc. Wrote and configured materialized views with complex queries to enable enriched data streams to Kafka.
Leveraged a variety of converters including String, Avro, Json and ByteArray to appropriately convert data processed by the source/sink and published/consumed by Kafka. 
Worked with a number of platform users to resolve issues with Avro schemas, recommend the most suitable primitive and complex datatypes, determine the appropriate level of nesting and overall end to end functionality of the Avro based client/app. 
Implemented Kafka Connect single message transforms like Cast, Flatten, TimestampConverter, RegexRouter, InsertField, ReplaceField etc. in a variety of situations including simplifying data models, enriching data streams with external/reference metadata, removing sensitive PII/PCI information like SSNs and phone numbers among other use cases. 
Leveraged Kubernetes configmaps to separate configuration details from images and create versatile, general purpose images for a number of use cases.  
Setup KSQL pods in Kubernetes to perform a variety of SQL functions including filtering, repartitioning, aggregation and grouping/sorting, STREAM-STREAM JOINs with sliding/hopping/tumbling windows, STREAM-TABLE JOINs and TABLE-TABLE JOINs and wrote the results to a variety of data stores using Kafka Connect Sinks.